API Workshop - API Description Languages

## Sections:

* [Overview of API Description Languages](#overview-of-api-description-languages)
* [What is an API Description Language](#what-is-an-api-description-language)
* [List of API Description Languages](#list-of-api-description-languages)
* [Restful API Description Languages](#restful-api-description-languages)
* [Bread Crumb Navigation](#bread-crumb-navigation)

#### Overview of API Description Languages

*API description languages can be thought of as the power tools of the API designer.*

API Description Languages make it easy to describe APIs in a precise way by working as a domain specific language.

API Designers use API Description Languages to better capture API Design decisions.

API Description languages can be used to describe the behavior of an API and can be used to build an API with automated tool support such as what [Swagger](https://swagger.io/) provides.

#### What is an API Description Language

API Description Languages are domain specific languages that are used for describing APIs.

Traits of API Description Languages:
  * Human Readable
  * Machine Readable
  * Easy for API Developers and API Designers to read, write and understand
  * Precise
  * Expressive
  * Well defined syntax that helps process with automated tools

#### List of API Description Languages

[Overview of API Description Languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overview_of_RESTful_API_Description_Languages)

> API Description Languages are sometimes called interface description languages (IDLs). The structured description might be used to generate documentation for human programmers; such documentation may be easier to read than free-form documentation, since all documentation generated by the same tool follows the same formatting conventions. Additionally, the description language is usually precise enough to allow automated generation of various software artifacts, like libraries, to access the API from various programming languages, which takes the burden of manually creating them off the programmers.

* Web Services Description Language
* Web Application Description Language

###### Web Services Description Language

[Web Services Description Language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_Services_Description_Language)

> The Web Services Description Language (WSDL) is an XML-based interface definition language that is used for describing the functionality offered by a web service. The acronym is also used for any specific WSDL description of a web service (also referred to as a WSDL file), which provides a machine-readable description of how the service can be called, what parameters it expects, and what data structures it returns. Therefore, its purpose is roughly similar to that of a type signature in a programming language.

###### Web Application Description Language

[Web Application Description Language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_Application_Description_Language)

> The Web Application Description Language (WADL) is a machine-readable XML description of HTTP-based web services. WADL models the resources provided by a service and the relationships between them.WADL is intended to simplify the reuse of web services that are based on the existing HTTP architecture of the Web. It is platform and language independent and aims to promote reuse of applications beyond the basic use in a web browser.

> WADL was submitted to the World Wide Web Consortium by Sun Microsystems on 31 August 2009, but the consortium has no current plans to standardize it. WADL is the REST equivalent of SOAP's Web Services Description Language (WSDL), which can also be used to describe REST web services.

##### Restful API Description Languages

*List of Restful API Description Languages:*

* [OpenAPI](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/master/versions/3.0.2.md)
* [API Blueprint](https://apiblueprint.org/)
* [RAML](https://raml.org/)

###### OpenAPI

[OpenAPI Specification](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/blob/master/versions/3.0.2.md)

> The OpenAPI Specification (OAS) defines a standard, language-agnostic interface to RESTful APIs which allows both humans and computers to discover and understand the capabilities of the service without access to source code, documentation, or through network traffic inspection. When properly defined, a consumer can understand and interact with the remote service with a minimal amount of implementation logic.

```yml
get:
  description: Returns pets based on ID
  summary: Find pets by ID
  operationId: getPetsById
  responses:
    '200':
      description: pet response
      content:
        '*/*' :
          schema:
            type: array
            items:
              $ref: '#/components/schemas/Pet'
    default:
      description: error payload
      content:
        'text/html':
          schema:
            $ref: '#/components/schemas/ErrorModel'
```

###### API Blueprint

> API Blueprint is simple and accessible to everybody involved in the API lifecycle. Its syntax is concise yet expressive. With API Blueprint you can quickly design and prototype APIs to be created or document and test already deployed mission-critical APIs.

```apib
# GET /message
+ Response 200 (text/plain)

        Hello World!
```

###### RAML

> RESTful API Modeling Language (RAML) makes it easy to manage the whole API lifecycle from design to sharing. It's concise - you only write what you need to define - and reusable. It is machine readable API design that is actually human friendly.

```yml
/books:
  get:
  post:
  put:
```

#### Bread Crumb Navigation
_________________________

Previous | Next
:------- | ---:
← [Delegation](./delegation.md) | [OpenAPI Initiative](./openapi.md) →
